Someone at home
did this when he was younger.
2.
when he was a teenager.
It was either his mother or his uncle.
at some point in time.
He's very kind-hearted. but he doesn't
feel that he has to do anything.
There's this kind of pampering.
I don't know why he gets
this special treatment.
That attitude of
"Let him sleep. he's tired..."
What's so sacred about a man's sleep?
That's the problem you need to solve.
There's another party involved in it.
You have to reach a solution together.
One of the currently available solutions
is to bring in a woman to help out.
This woman will come
and be treated well.
She will live with us at home.
Of course. there's always a preference
not to have anyone at home with us.
But as long as Tarek
can't make time for me
the way that I make time for everything.
then we need a domestic worker.
This is what ultimately convinced him.
Are you able to set aside
half of your day?
I dedicate half of my day to the house
and the other half to work.
Are you able to dedicate
half of your day? No.
If he has a project. he can be out of the house for a whole week. night and day.
Who is he leaving it all to? To me.
Speaking in absolute terms
cleaning the house is my responsibility.
Well. it's the responsibility
of everyone living here...
If I am using the plate. I have to clean it.
If he is using a plate. he has to clean it.
In that sense.
I wish I didn't need to have a maid.
but I can't.
Life would become too difficult.
Especially if you consider
Masculinity... in the sense that
Is cleaning the house really my responsibility? No it's not.
But it has been designated
as my responsibility.
So I am expected to go to work
but the house has to be spotless.
Clean clothes should
be hanging in the closet.
If there are no clean clothes.
whose responsibility is it?
It's never the responsibility of
the person who dirtied the clothes.
It's always up to the mother.
the woman of the house.
The domestic worker is
an important solution
where my children are concerned.
Because I work long hours
and I need a solution.
When I first got married.
I didn't need a maid.
Even when the kids
were young. I managed.
But as they grew older
I needed someone to stay at home
when I went out.
Especially at night.
because I often had night shifts
or I had to accompany my husband
to social events.
He is a doctor and has many
conferences to attend.
I always had to accompany him.
There were no babysitters
to call up at the last minute
or to pay by the hour.
So the maid was one of the solutions
that my husband and I found
to maintain our social life.
All this time that I had to myself
before getting married
evaporated with the presence of kids
the husband. the social life
and other responsibilities...
One becomes like a motor. always running
with no time to herself.
The domestic worker's presence
gave me back that lost time.
and I felt
I could go back to that earlier time
and resume my work
and progress in it.
If I stay late at work.
it's not a big issue.
That was the nicest thing about it.
I went back to work with full force
I could really give it my time
and energy.  and develop
and become as productive
as my husband.
He and I became equal.
But development at work
also creates a side to my life
that they don't know much about.
Clients. phone calls.
and sometimes invitations...
Something happens.
It's not that he feels threatened
but something eats at him.
We are on a more equal footing
at the level of productivity
but also of independence.
This is when he starts to poke a little
"I want this dish done by your hand..."
As if to insinuate.
or at least so I felt.
that I am falling short
of my duties at home.
he wants this dish or that thing done...
Keeping in mind that someone needs to supervise the maid at home.
and it's always the job
of the lady of the house.
She buys the detergents
she tells the her what to do.
On Monday. Wednesday and Friday
clean the living room.
On Tuesday. Thursday. etc...
clean the balconies.
So managing the maid's work
is the job of the lady of the house.
This responsibility always falls on her
and the man has nothing to do with it.
So she gives us the time to go work outside the house
and the husband has to accept this idea.
That's just how things are.
What I am discovering.
and which is rarely mentioned.
I don't know if you agree...
is that I need my time to be a woman.
By this I mean...
Not to be limited to daily chores.
If both he and I are occupied by them
Did we sweep the balcony?
Did we wash the reusable diapers?
If we both spend our time
only on this kind of conversation...
If we are only living
this kind of experience...
At work.  and then we start
something else
because this kind of work never ends...
In fact. the nightmare is
that housework never ends.
You can't just do it twice a week.
especially if you have kids.
So your life becomes only about that.
So the real crime is that
we are hiring a woman and limiting
her life to just that one thing.
But when we take care
of the kids on the weekend.
she has time to be a woman.
Give me the rest of the week.
so that I am able to take a shower
when I get back from work
instead of cleaning the house
as soon as I'm home.
You know what I mean?
I can take a shower
maybe go out to dinner
or feel beautiful again
or we can kiss on the balcony...
That way we're not just people who...
have completely lost our libido
who have lost this feeling
that I am a woman
you are a man...
How did we use to
encounter each other before?
If there's no worker to take care
of them. we're in trouble.
That means I have to quit my job
I don't want to put them
in a nursing home
because my parents are not ill.
Although my mother keeps telling me
we can take care of ourselves.
stop worrying.
Your father can still drive
don't worry.
But I don't know...
Maybe I am obsessing
about my parents
but I got really scared
when my mother fell.
I just don't want to think about
who will look after my parents
if the maid leaves or there is no maid
because that will only
make matters worse.
Right now. I don't want to think ahead.
I have a maid. so let me be at ease
and not worry about difficult decisions
I have to make in the future.
With the best treatment.
under the best conditions
and I give her all the vacation
time she wants.
because I respect the fact
that in front of me is a human being
who already must not enjoy living
in my house instead of her own...
I am aware of all of this.
But I couldn't do anything else
under these conditions.
So you can't ask me why I had kids
or why I am working
if on a humane level.
I am opposed to the principle.
I am not opposed to that degree.
It turns out I am not that opposed to it.
There's this whole other point of view
that the woman also needs money.
she is also learning things.
she too will have children
and will rely on the experience
she gathered.
Whatever. She likes us and we like her.
All these things...
I've never had a difficult experience
with a maid at home.
Karim is very likeable
and so am I.
On a humane level
the experience was not so bad
that I thought I had to quit work
and bury myself at home with my kids.
cooking and cleaning.
And quit my work that I love
and that means a lot to me.
I still think that the system is repugnant.
but it's a question of survival for me.
I was losing it. I got depressed.
I found myself cooking
and cleaning all day.
That's not my ambition in life.
To go on with my life and be
something else than a mother
I needed someone to help me.
And my husband was unable
to provide more than 10%.
that's the most he could do.
I've not made peace
with the Kafala system
I am still opposed to it
but I found no other solution.
I am assigning her particular duties
but I am still present.
raising the children and taking care.
Even with a domestic worker at home.
many things remain to be done.
There are decisions to be made.
I tell her what to do.
I am giving her tasks
which drain my energy.
when I could use my energy elsewhere.
But this doesn't mean
I gave her all my duties
or that she's become
the mother. Not at all.
Personally. I used to make time
to learn about their circumstances.
their problems and their lives.
I even followed their news back home.
When it was time for them to leave
we would prepare their departure
what needs to be done.
how to collect money for them...
For example. Masay
who stayed with us for 9 years
sent all her money to her parents
during the first 4 years.
After 4 years I told her that's enough.
I will save the money for you.
Whatever you need in expenses
I'll give you a certain amount every day
but let's save up the rest.
She's working but
without money to show for it.
We thought about what she could
do when she went back to her country.
She could use the money
to open a restaurant.
and she now cooks
better Lebanese food than I do!
She could open a Lebanese restaurant...
So we brainstormed together.
It made me feel
that I am securing their future.
Guaranteeing that the years
they spent here amounted to something.
It was not wasted time in their life.
I felt I was securing their future
as a sort of compensation
with which they can
start something new elsewhere.
In fact. I didn't see them.
I was so caught up with my husband.
my kids. my social life...
I just didn't see them.
They were invisible to me.
It was only after I became aware
of my own desire for freedom
after my divorce.
that I noticed her as a person
who is living with me at home.
I realized that she was a human being.
Invisible previously? Yes they were.
They were always an extension
of me. never a priority.
But when the kids grew up. and particularly after the divorce.
when I was no longer
ordering her around non-stop
that's when I noticed her presence.
I started seeing her.
She became visible to me.
Suddenly I felt that I had a mission.
My dear girl. exist! Be visible!
You have the right to exist.
You can.
Exist beyond the work I give you.
Well. I am trying. But apparently
she doesn't want to take that step.
A woman stays with you for 9 years
and then she leaves... just like that.
When she's gone. nobody
brings her up anymore.
She disappears.
I was worried about
what would happen when she left.
Not at the level of services
I would get another domestic worker.
But I worried about missing her.
especially the kids.
What would we do?
Nadi was 4 years old. and Nour 6.
She raised them.
she held the house together.
But when she left...
That was it. she was gone.
Even the kids grew up and understood.
How do I explain it?
For example.
It's like she is a picture frame.
She frames the family picture.
You can remove the frame.
the picture stays.
You change the frame
but the picture remains the same.
Nobody can come into the picture.
Without a doubt.
the underlying reason for her presence
is due to a fundamental failure
on our part
regarding the home.
despite the discourse that argues
that we're working all the time.
and income. and house chores...
If you want. it's a compromise
that one tries to make.
On one hand. it stops the wife
from saying she is overworked.
On the other hand.
the man puts his mind at ease.
and  spends some money
to get rid of the headache.
That's how it is in the end.
But the ethical dimension
keeps playing in my head.
It never goes away. but I forget it
or ignore it sometimes.
When it's in my interest
of course. I do that.
You choose what gives you comfort.
You buy problems off.